---
layout: post
title:  "The Creamsicle Bass"
author: mike
categories: [ Music, project ]
tags: [music, bass, project]
image: assets/img/bass/BassWithPickguard.jpg
thumb: assets/img/bass/BassWithPickguard.jpg
description: "Part 1 of my Bass Build"
---

I've played the bass for quite a while but I've been primarily playing on an
Ibanez SR300E. For those familiar with this bass, its a great budget option for
beginners and has a variety of tones you can get out of it by splitting the
pickups, balancing them, and using an active pre-amp. As I played more and more,
however, I realized I wanted a good P-Bass tone. I'm also a big fan of the
Jaguar basses and so I decided to start looking at Jaguars. I found the Fender
Player series Jaguars, which are very nice instruments, however, I couldn't
quite justify paying the $800 to get it. Since I like woodworking (I'm not good
at it, but I like it), I decided to build my own bass. I found a kit by
Vibeworks on Amazon and Ebay that had a paddle headstock I could shape, and a
body similar to a Jaguar, so I decided to go for it.

The Creamsicle theme is paying homage to my Grandpa Walker. I have fond memories
from my childhood eating creamsicles with him in the summer and it reminds me of
a time before I had the responsibilities, anxieties, and life problems that I
now deal with. I still love creamsicles today and like the idea of a fun,
childish theme for my bass, so it was decided. I picked up some orange spray
paint from Home Depot, a couple of clear coat options, and set to work.

## Headstock Shape

The first thing I had to do was figure out how to shape the paddle headstock. I
was hoping I could cut it down to have the tuners on alternating sides, like an
acoustic guitar, since I was worried about weight distribution with such a light
body. As I started templating the shape with paper, it became apparent that this
wouldn't look good on this bass. I didn't have enough wood on the end to feel
comfortable with the tuners mounted the way they are. So ultimately, I went with
a classic looking headstock that would kind of be a mix between a standard
Fender bass and a Telecaster. I used a jigsaw to cut the shape and then sanded
it smooth. I'm happy with how it turned out, but I wish I had replaced my jigsaw
blade before cutting it. The blade was dull and it caused a lot of shaking
during the cuts, which put some dents in the neck. They aren't noticeable in
playing, but they are there.

![Bass Neck]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/bass/BassNeck.jpg)

## Sanding Purgatory

When I got the bass, I was prepared to do all the finishing work myself. I
assumed (correctly) that a rough sanding would be done on everything, so I would
want to prep it for painting by sanding it finer and fixing rough machined
patches. I got the kit in the winter, so it was perfect. I setup in my garage
and got to work sanding the body all the way up to 400 grit. There were several
rough patches, but the biggest win from this was how smooth everything got. This
took weeks of sanding since I was doing it nights and weekends, which means
primarily sanding by hand.

What made things worse was the fact that they had fretted the fretboard, but it
was still as rough as the rest of the body. To help with this, I taped the frets
(not the fretboard, just the frets) and set to work sanding. The inlays looked
like they were either black plastic, or died pieces of wood. They weren't really
shiny, so I felt fine sanding them down to make sure they were level with the
rest of the fretboard.

## Painting

I started out with some White Rustoleum Primer from Home Depot, and tried to add
coats whenever it was warm enough. I did this for two reasons. First, I thought
that I wanted to be safe, but I didn't want to go through all of the work of
sealing the wood for painting, so I made sure I had a good coat of primer on for
the paint to adhere to and level out on. The second reason was if I decided to
make the bass look road-worn, I could have white underneath, emphasizing the
creamsicle theme.

![Bass With Primer]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/bass/BassPrimer.jpg)

While priming the body, I learned an important lesson about painting without
hanging. I was putting the body in a diaper box, and painting it in there, and
while I let it dry for the time on the can, if I tried to paint both sides in
the same day, I always ended up with the paint sticking to the box at least a
little bit. So when it came to the color coats, I got some yarn (Its what I had)
and hung it from my garage door track while painting. This worked out much
better, and let me do a full coat over the whole body at once instead of needing
to wait a day or so for things to dry.

![Bass Body Painted Orange]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/bass/BassOrangeBody.jpg)

After getting several coats of color on the bass, I leveled out the paint with
some 800 grit sand paper. Since this was my first time, I sanded too much in
some areas and had to paint more, but eventually I got a flat coat of paint on
there, and it dried so I was ready to get the clear coat on.

## Clear Coat

Not knowing too much about paints, finishes, etc. I went with a crystal clear
lacquer spray. I did a few coats of this, and then sanded it with 800 grit
sandpaper. After sanding, I noticed some cracks starting to appear in the
finish, and was pretty disappointed. After doing some research, it appears that
this is common for lacquer finishes if you sand too hard, but I also suspected
that temperature changes could affect that. To avoid this, I sanded the clear
coat off, touched-up a few areas where the paint was thin, then used the oil-
based polyeurethane that I used on the neck.

Not only will this be a stronger finish, but it also hasn't shown any signs of
cracking like the other finish did. I also haven't noticed any discoloration,
which was one reason I initially avoided the oil-based poly.

I sanded down the neck and body up to 3000 grit, and it feels really smooth. I
did leave some imperfections on the body, because it gave it an almost sparkly
look, which reminded me of the texture you sometimes get on popsicles. After
that sanding it was time to polish, and everything was looking great! I removed
the tape from the frets, cleaned them up with some fine steel wool, and wiped
everything down and polished it one last time. Finally I bolted the neck on,
started attaching hardware and got it put together.

![Bass Assembled]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/img/bass/BassFull.jpg)

## QA Issues

Sadly, after getting things strung up, I discovered some of the QA issues with
this bass. For one, the bridge didn't line up the strings evenly with the neck.
The E string was in the right place, but the G string was fairly far from the
bottom of the fretboard. I got my pickups installed, but I had to shift them
over to lineup with the strings, and they no longer lined up with the pickguard.
I was alright with that because I got some pearl white pickguard material I was
going to make a new pickguard out of, but I was disappointed that I wouldn't be
able to use the original one as a template.

I started doing a setup, and I think the nut might also be too short. I'm
getting some fret buzz from those lower frets, and while I was able to fix a lot
of that during the setup, it still feels a little low near the nut. We'll see if
I replace that though. The setup wasn't too hard though, and the intonation was
actually really close right out of the gate without adjustments.

The other sad part is how bad of neckdive this bass has. Using a kitchen scale,
a bag around the strap, and some other testing, it feels like there's about 2lbs
of weight that need to be added near the strap. The real cause of the bad
neckdive is the light body with a short upper horn. Most Jaguars have a horn
that ends close to the 12th fret. Mine is around the 14-15th. After looking
around a lot and doing some testing, I think my best path forward is this: try
adding weight to my strap to pull the body down more, try swapping out the
tuners for lightweight tuners, and installing a hi-mass bridge. If none of these
options work well, my next step could be creating a strap button extender to put
the end of the strap out near the 12th fret like other basses.

## Pickguard

Like I mentioned at the start of this, I'm new-ish to woodworking, so using a
router to make precise cuts didn't go too well. I practiced cutting out
templates from MDF, and once I had something I liked, I tried cutting it out of
the pickguard material. I used clamps to keep the materials together, but in
hind-sight, I should've grabbed some double-sided tape instead. What I ended up
with was a bad cut around the pickups, so I couldn't use it on the bass. I also
cut out too much material, so I didn't have enough to cut out another pickguard
using the same jaguar design.

I'm currently working on designing a new one, and I will likely try to copy
something similar to a jazz pickguard, or the Talman Bass (Ibanez). I'll still
stick with the pearl white material, but we'll see how it goes.
